Introduction

Pathology is a branch of medicine, whose focus is the study and diagnosis of diseases [1]. In order to establish a diagnostic, the analysis of tissue morphology is a central tool in the pathologist’s box. The examination of a tissue under the microscope is inescapable in the study and diagnosis of cancers, including for example thyroid cancer, despite the limitations associated with it. A central limitation of microscopy-based diagnostic and tissue morphology analysis is that tissue description is qualitative and, therefore, contains an inherent subjectivity : in the example of thyroid cancer, the diagnostic of a cancerous tissue is based on qualitative descriptions of the elements present on the microscope image (e.g. colored cell nuclei are « big » and « irregular » in cancer cells).

As mentioned, the qualitative nature of tissue morphology analysis is intrinsically limiting, hindering our ability to formalize our understanding of histology, as well as rendering the diagnostic of a disease potentially depending on the subjective human judgement of a pathologist. In order to ground tissue morphology study and tissue-based diagnostic of diseases on more quantitative grounds, artificial intelligence provides a promising path. Indeed, recent AI techniques provide a way to extract semantic information from an input image, composed of a matrix of pixels which could, in our case, represent a microscope image of a tissue of interest. An example of AI technique able to extract semantic information from input matrices of pixels is auto encoders, a self-supervised AI technique in which an artificial neural network is trained to reconstruct an input image, with a « bottleneck » layer of neurons that forces the network to compress the essential input information in order to « make it fit » in the « bottleneck » layer and be able to reconstruct the input image efficiently.

The compressed numerical representation of the input image can be considered as a latent representation of it, embedded in a space of reduced dimensions (defined by the size of the « bottleneck » neural layer) compared to the space in which the input image is embedded (defined by the number of pixels of the input image). On this numerical representation, quantitative techniques like clustering or dimensionality reduction algorithms can then easily be applied, allowing the field of tissue morphology analysis to become more quantitative. Furthermore, AI techniques allow for a high-throughput analysis of tissue images, which is obviously not feasible when the analysis is done by human pathologists.

Autoencoders sensitive to rotation, which is a limitation in the context of tissue morphology analysis, as the image orientation is not linked to biologically meaningful. An alternative self-supervised AI technique to derive latent representations is contrastive learning, in which an artificial neural network is trained to be able to detect whether two transformed images originate from the same input image. In practice, the AI neural network used for this project was trained on a pretext task, being able to classify images from the internet into categories of everyday life, and has been proven to be useful for histological applications despite not being trained on a dataset of histological images (illustrating the generalization capability of those AI techniques based on latent-representation computations of input images).

The particular tissue morphology study that will be of interest to us will be to explore associations between morphological descriptors, computed using an AI neural network based on the idea of building latent representations of the tissue images, and clinical descriptors, as well as gene expression measured by RNA-seq. The overall paradigm guiding the project is that tissue morphology is highly variant in the general population, even among clinically healthy individuals, an observation which might not be reflected by a traditional study of tissue morphology essentially based on the tissues of young healthy individuals. This can be illustrated by studies made on the thyroid tissue morphology : thyroid nodules (generally benign tumors) were found in 21% of patients examined by neck palpation and 67% of patients examined by ultrasonography, despite the examinations not being related to the patients having a thyroid disease. Another study, based on autopsies, found that undiagnosed thyroid microcarcinomas were found in 22-36% of cases, and autoimmune thyroiditis in 27% of women and 7% of men. These results illustrate how diverse tissue morphologies likely are in the general population, and that a tissue morphology that is different compared to its canonical version established on a healthy young subject does not necessarily imply the presence of a disease.

In order to explore those associations between AI-computed morphological descriptors and clinical descriptors as well as RNA-seq measured gene expression, we will proceed in the following way. Our dataset will comprise AI-computed morphological counts on different aorta tissue images. The counts are established as following : 32 clusters are defined and computed on the whole set of GTEx [2] available tissue morphology aorta available images. Each image is divided in tiles, and each tile is associated to a morphological cluster, creating a sort of morphological summary of the organ which will be used in further computations. In addition to this, we will use GTEx clinical data associated to each GTEx sample, describing the patients characteristics as well as the sample collection characteristics, as well as gene expression matrices for the different obtained tissue samples. 

We will at first analyze clinical variables, looking at how they are distributed in our dataset, whether several of them are correlated, and whether technical variables could be confounding health or demographic variables. After this dataset exploration step, we will look for associations between the expression of morphological clusters and clinical variables, exploring to what extent morphological variables can be linked to clinical variables, and we will, in doing so, estimate the influence on technical variables on the results, by conducting the analysis with and without controlling for those technical variables. Finally, we will look for genes that are significantly differentially regulated with respect to the expression of morphological clusters, reporting the number of significantly differentially regulated genes as well as the 10 most significantly up-regulated genes for each of the 32 defined morphological clusters. The same analysis will be conducted on gene sets from the REACTOME database, analyzing whether genes associated to a given biological pathway are differentially expressed with respect to the expression of a morphological cluster or not.

 


1) Department of Pathology. (n.d.). What is pathology? McGill University. Retrieved June 5, 2024, from https://www.mcgill.ca/pathology/about/definition
2) Lonsdale, J., Thomas, J., Salvatore, M., Phillips, R., Lo, E., Shad, S., ... & Moore, H. F. (2013). The genotype-tissue expression (GTEx) project. Nature genetics, 45(6), 580-585.
